Good morning.
My name is Mark Tozer-Vilches.
I'm the hardware technology
manager for developer relations.
This morning is session 102,
Performance Optimization
with Velocity Engine.
This session, for those of you,
if you ever find yourself doodling,
doing square roots, factoring polynomials
while you're on the phone,
this is the session for you.
So quite a way to start the
morning with some cool math.
We've got some great content,
some cool demos,
and I'd like to bring up Dr.
Ali Sazegari, the head of the Vector
and Numerics group.
Hi, I'm Ali Sazegari,
and welcome to our session.
Today, we're going to talk about a
couple of different things.
The first topic that I'm going
to talk about is what we've done
for Jaguar on the numerics side.
Then, we're going to dive into the
benefits of using the vector units,
either by itself or using our
libraries that we have in Jaguar.
And in the last section of our talk,
we are going to show you how to use
the new performance tools that are
absolutely crucial to your success.
So, let's get started with this,
if I can figure out what to do.
All right,
so numerics libraries in Jaguar.
You know that our numerics library,
the LibM, that you've been using up to
10.1.3 was based on a freely
distributable library from Sun,
FD LibM.
We changed that completely,
and we're going to go through that.
Then we're going to go talk about
the benefits of vectorization.
And if you don't want
to vectorize your code,
vector libraries in Jaguar
are going to be very helpful.
Then some optimization techniques,
details of what to do about your code,
how to make it a little bit faster.
Hopefully you're going to
use those in your code.
And then profiling tools.
Okay, what you will learn.
Available libraries.
We have expanded the available libraries
on the Jaguar as we go along in Mac OS,
then we'll have a richer
and richer set of libraries.
Some optimization techniques.
The data injection method that
we're going to talk about.
Vector versus scalar algorithms.
We are going to draw your attention to
be aware of the LSU bottleneck on our
machine and using the instruction set
architecture details of the processor
if you really want to squeeze a lot
of performance out of this machine.
The whole idea here is that the
increased parallelism is really key
for better throughput on PowerPC.
And again, at the end,
we're going to talk
about profiling tools.
Thanks.
What's new in Jaguar?
On the numerics front,
we have revamped LibM.
It is now based on MathLib V5.
For those of you who come
from the OS 9 platform,
you are familiar with MathLib V3.
We went to MathLib V4,
and I'm going to talk about
that a little bit later.
And now, MathLib V5.
We also have brought FixMath
up to snuff again on Jaguar.
On the vector domain, we have an expanded
signal processing library.
We also have a full standard
basic linear algebra subroutines,
which you can build your
algorithms on top of.
And then we're going to show
you some vectorized technologies
that are going to come to Jaguar.
New Libem in Jaguar.
Mathlib V4 shipped in 10.1.3.
We had a pretty bad performance
before that because of the
FD Libem that was used.
We switched that completely and we
went to what was the core of the OS9.
We ported that.
So 10.1.3 and beyond basically
has parity with OS9's performance.
Coming in Jaguar is Mathlib V5.
Mathlib V5 is faster than V3,
which is in Mac OS 9.
And the important part to remember about
V5 is that it is completely IEEE 754
and C99 compliant on double precision.
The implementations which are available
are on PowerPC and IA32 for Darwin users.
This is a no-holds-bar, high-performance,
extremely accurate, and very robust.
mathematical library that
we're pretty proud of.
New fixed math in Jaguar.
For those of you who
continue to use fixed math,
we have ported what we had
initially done for OS 9.
Now in Jaguar,
fixed math is going to be floating point
based as it used to be in Mac OS 9.
I would like to emphasize that even
though fixed math is extremely fast now,
even a little bit faster
than what OS 9 was,
I highly recommend that
you don't use fixed math,
that you migrate your code to using
floating point because floating
point on PowerPC is significantly
faster than what we do in here.
Okay,
now it's a good time to talk about some
general guidelines for vectorization.
What we do is, basically,
this page here describes what
we do every day at Apple for
everything we just come across.
And my first and most important
suggestion here is to profile your code,
profile and profile,
and then when you're done,
profile some more.
Because you really want to
know where your bottlenecks are
and then move on from there.
Use Chut2Profile.
Chut is the computer hardware
understanding development tools
that we're going to talk in
details later on in this session.
It will show you, it has a lot of tools,
it will show you where the
bottlenecks are and where you
should go and make your code fly.
A lot of times,
developers may think that a
particular routine is really
the cause of the problem.
And after working on it for several
days and making it a lot faster,
they find out that they really
haven't budged the performance at all.
And this has happened to us before.
Code has been brought to us when
they thought that this was the
bottleneck and after working
on it for about a week or two,
we've given them back.
And what we've done is that
we've basically taken 2 or 3% of
the entire processing time down
to 1% or maybe half a percent.
But the overall application
is not that much faster.
So Chut is extremely
important in that regard.
The next thing is to rewrite.
So you rewrite the scalar
using data parallelism,
which I will go over in detail of that.
Then after you've done that
and after you've found out
where your bottlenecks are,
you should rewrite
select parts in vector.
And then use the vector libraries
that we have as much as possible.
In our game,
basically you need to take charge of what
the compiler is doing as much as you can.
And one of the things to worry about
is that because we have a fairly...
We have a large set of registers,
a very rich set of registers,
and we want to make sure that
we use that all the time,
you need to be aware of the register
spillage inside your compiler and
see if this is not working out
and do something else instead.
At this time, what I'd like to do is
to go over an example.
This example is the IMDCT for MP3.
For some of you who are not
familiar with this particular thing,
this is a transformation not unlike FFTs,
the Inverse Modified
Discrete Cosine Transform.
And this chart here shows what
happens to this particular piece of
code as we go along and optimize it.
I'd like to mention that the results
of all these are exactly the same.
We have not changed the results
of any of this stuff here.
There's no shortcut in the results.
The results are still
correct towards the bottom.
The first IMDCT code has, of course,
this guy calls cosines.
And if you put the cosines in a loop,
it has a loop, and you call our libm,
which is highly accurate,
53 bits of significant, you'll get 583.
And this is units of time on any machine,
let's say.
The smaller numbers in
this chart are better.
Just taking this cosine out
and making it a table lookup,
which becomes the original ISO code,
so if you paid your money and
you got your original ISO manual
and you just typed it in,
you get 20.1.
So the moral of the story in here is
that don't call libm 5 million times
inside of a loop if you can help it,
especially if you're not
interested in very high accuracy.
So the moral of the story in here is
that don't call libm 5 million times
inside of a loop if you can help it,
especially if you're not
interested in very high accuracy.
The next thing is an algorithmic
optimization in here.
And we have not moved into
the vector domain right now.
We're still sitting on
top of the scalar domain.
The Lie optimization is a technique
which will bring the size of the
2048 cosine table lookup down to 384.
It turns out that table lookup is fast,
but it's not as fast as doing
actual computation on the machine.
And bringing the size of the
table lookup will have... an
improvement over the performance.
After the Lie optimization is done,
we found a way, this is actually a
standard way of doing this,
of making our IMDCT call our FFT.
We make IMDCT based on the FFT.
This will bring the cosine
table even further down.
And now the scalar code
is running at 1.23.
1.23 units of time,
when we started with 583,
or if you just look at
the original ISO code,
it's at 20.1.
So it's a fair amount
of improvement already.
And going from the scalar,
which we're still sitting
on the scalar domain here,
to the vector domain,
then we are going to almost
three times performance just
moving from scalar to vector.
The moral of the story in here is that
you should not be calling libraries
and site loops if you don't have to.
You should be minimizing your
table lookups if that's possible.
And the second thing is that work on your
scalar code before you move on to vector
to make sure where your bottlenecks are
and how to squeeze the performance out of
it and then move on to the vector code.
What are the vectorization benefits?
And this is true for all platforms,
including ours.
On ours, the PowerPC vector unit
has an orthogonal design.
It really is not a second-class
citizen to anybody.
As opposed to the design of the MMX,
which sits on top of the floating-point
register file and has a granularity
which is larger than one instruction.
So in order to amortize the
use of the vector engine,
you have to use a few of the
instructions before you move on
so that you'll see the benefits.
You can actually use this in
conjunction with anything else.
There is no penalty.
There is no overhead in
using the vector engine.
The engine is completely pipeline,
single-cycle instruction execution,
unlike some other parts of the PowerPC,
which I will go through.
So this is extremely important because
if you want to have a lot of performance,
you do not want to have
stalls in the pipeline.
The other benefits of the
vectorization is some of the
libraries that we offer in Jaguar.
The first one is the digital
signal processing library,
which we have enhanced quite a bit.
The BLOS, which is a standard BLOS.
I will go into detail of that.
The basic operations,
and that is the add, subtract, multiply,
divide for anything which does
not exist on the processor.
So that you can use, let's say,
32 bits multiplies.
We don't have 32 bit
multipliers on the AlteVec.
And Mathlib,
which is a counterpart of the regular
library that we have on the scalar
domain that you access with LibM.
You can access that with VMathlib.
We promise you better results and better
performance on VMathlib as we go on,
and Jaguar will see some of that benefit.
At this time,
what I would like to do is show you
what would happen if you actually
took your code and vectorized it.
And spent some time going over it,
profiled it,
and found out where the bottlenecks are.
And what I would like to do is introduce
my friend Ralph Bruner of Core Graphics.
And he is going to show us
vectorization work that we have
done for portions of cores.
I want to use that microphone there.
So what do we have here?
The higher the speedometer,
the better frame rate,
and this is what we want,
just like the speed, okay?
Okay.
I get a frame rate of
about 20 frames per second.
Go and turn on all the vector code
we have in Quartz and do the same.
You get about 30 frames per second.
You get the idea.
Okay, so this is the Quartz compositor
that has been vectorized.
So the Quartz compositor is the
piece of code that takes all the
Windows content and mixes together
to present the final on-screen result
and does all the translucency and
genie effects and stuff like that.
So this is part of Jaguar, right?
This is part of Jaguar.
So if you bought a G4 and
you put a Jaguar on it,
you'll see the benefits right
away on at least resizing.
So, the other little demo
I have is life resizing.
We identified that as
one of the performance
bottlenecks in using Mac OS X,
so we worked on that a bit.
And first thing I'm going to show
again is life resizing a window.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, and here what has been vectorized
is the compositing part,
like in the translucent
terminal demo before,
but also pattern fields like the
pinstripes and the scrollbars,
text drawing, shadow generation,
a set of about eight
functions that we vectorized.
And each of these functions measured
by themselves gave us something like
three to five X performance improvement,
and the overall performance
improvement is then quite noticeable.
Okay.
The third demo I have
is a bit of an oddity.
So I have an image here which
is stored in an unusual format.
It doesn't have red, green,
and blue at every pixel.
It has a polynomial for red, green,
and blue for every pixel.
And so you can actually evaluate the
entire image at different points.
And what that means here,
we can set the focus
distance in that image.
So this is an example for an algorithm
that you probably wouldn't even
try if you hadn't have a SIMD unit.
So how many polynomials
are you evaluating here?
So that's 1.3 million
polynomials for a single frame.
1.3 million polynomials
for a single frame.
Don't try this at home.
And the data that's backing is
just the coefficients for these
polynomials is 8 megabytes.
So, let me just wiggle this around a bit
to get the performance numbers here.
- And we see we run about
15 to 18 frames per second.
And just for kicks,
I implemented a scalar version of that.
Which is rather sad.
It's like two frames per second.
Okay.
So that's it for the demos.
All right.
Thank you, Ralph.
So as you see...
Thank you very much.
So as you see, just spending some time
vectorizing your code,
and this is not calling our libraries,
just finding out where the
bottlenecks are and spending
time and vectorizing will have a
huge effect on the performance.
Of course, Quartz is an extremely
important component of Mac OS X,
and everything you saw in here besides
the 1.3 million polynomials per frame
is going to be included in Jaguar,
and Jaguar will see the benefits of that.
The next thing I would
like to show you again is,
again,
some more benefits of vectorization,
what happens if we vectorize
some other portions,
and I would like to ask
Robert Murley to come up.
We have vectorized the RGB to
RGB color transformation for ColorSync,
and Bob is going to show us what happens
with the vectorization of that component.
[Transcript missing]
One on your right is running
without any vectorization.
The vectorization you will
see is the one on your left.
The part that has been
vectorized is ColorSync,
the color correction software
that is built into the map.
So I wanted to show you the
speed difference between scalar
and vector for ColorSync.
Looks like as we can see the... Oops,
that wasn't fair.
All right.
He really handicapped
the scalar one this time.
Let me try that again.
Okay.
The scaler is slow, but not that slow.
All right.
Is that clicked here?
OK, here we go.
I got it this time.
All right.
The gods of demos are with us again.
We can see that the vector one is faster,
and the vector was
done before the scaler,
so we can take it back up also.
I just wanted to mention also that
about roughly 60% of the processing
going on here is color sync,
and the rest is other things.
The color sync vector is,
if you saw it by itself,
it's about 2.2 times
faster than the scaler.
And that is an overall speed improvement
of the ColorSync scalar code,
right?
Correct.
Okay.
All right.
Thank you, Bob.
Again, this is...
So again,
this is a major component of Mac OS X,
and Jaguar will have this.
And if you have a G4,
you will get a better
RGB to RGB transformation.
So let's talk in detail about
some of the libraries that
we have for the new Jaguar.
The new one,
which is quite dear to my heart,
is the signal processing one.
The DSP, VDSP,
we've had this for a while.
It was a single-precision-based,
very fast signal processing library.
And what we've done for Jaguar,
we've added double-precision
DSP functions.
And we've also added base 3 and
base 5 FFTs because there was some
demand for base 3 and base 5s.
These are very high performance
and excellent single-complex
on 1D and 2D FFTs.
For those of you who
are using FFTs in here,
these numbers should be fairly familiar.
The 1024 complex FFT takes only
9.8 microseconds on a 1GHz PowerPC.
That's only on one processor.
And the real one takes 5.2 microseconds.
I'd like to tell you that on PowerPC,
we were the first ones
to make available FFTs,
which were getting processed
at 1024 complex FFTs,
which were processed under
20 microseconds and now
under 10 microseconds.
So going over some of
the details of the DSP,
I'd like to show you the
performance and compare that to,
what used to be the highest
clocked Pentium machine.
What we have here is various
nodes of the FFT from 256 to 4096.
The blue one is our VDSP library
and the yellow one is the IPP.
IPP is the Intel's Integrated
Performance Primitive Library,
that many of you may be familiar with.
And we are calling it, these are in-cache
transformations that we are doing.
And as you can see, the 1GHz G4,
is compared fairly favorably
with the 2.2GHz P4.
If you go to a 2.4GHz P4,
then you'll get a little
bit better performance,
about 4 or 5%, but the numbers
look pretty much the same.
We're still faster than a 1GHz machine.
Here is the real one, the FFT.
We have a slightly better algorithm
and we do better than the IPP,
which is, which is interesting.
I'd like to follow this up for
the image processing folks.
We have a 2D FFT, also the same thing.
The 2D FFT is a fairly tough
guy to implement and to
get right and make it fast.
But again, the VDSP is doing a better job
than the Intel's primitives.
I'd like to follow this
up with the complex one.
And again, the complex also is faster.
We only have four of
these graphs in here,
so I don't want to bore you,
but I want to tell you that the signal
processing library that we have in
Jaguar is really second to none.
It is extremely high performance
on the vector engine.
It's also very high performance
on the floating point unit now,
if you wanted to choose the
double precision instead
of the single precision.
Typically,
the difference between the vector
performance and the scalar performance
right now is anywhere from 4 to 5 times.
So you will go,
if you use the VDSP on the vector engine,
you'll get 4 to 5 times.
So you'll get 4 times better performance
than you'd use it on the scalar engine,
and the scalar engine
is already hand tuned.
What I would like to do here
is now we've talked about the
benefits of vectorization if
you just went and vectorized.
And what I would like to now show is
what happens if you use our libraries
like the FFTs and other things.
I'd like to introduce my friend here,
Bill Kincaid, who is going to show what
iTunes does with our library.
All right,
so all those other demos are cool,
but we all know what
really matters is MP3.
Okay.
Here's an unbiased view of some
guy who actually works on iTunes.
A couple of different
builds of iTunes here,
and I was going to show them to you on
identical machines running side-by-side,
but we don't have identical machines,
so I'm not going to do that.
Instead, I'm going to ask you to...
Watch the two versions,
one running after the other,
and remember what the performance
of the first one was as you're
watching the second one.
It should be pretty obvious.
Just before I actually
run the demo for you,
let me give you some figures on the
sort of demands that we're making on
the processor and vector unit here.
What I'm going to show
you is MP3 encoding,
during the course of which
at sort of typical settings,
we'll run through on the
order of half a million FFTs,
complex FFTs, to encode an album.
And we'll run through a
similar number of MDCTs.
The MDCT is essentially identical to
the IMDCT that Ali was talking about.
It's the forward transform
instead of the inverse transform.
So there's an awful lot of
computation going on here.
In fact, a couple of years ago,
it was considered...
[Transcript missing]
The first thing we want to talk
about is the special build of
iTunes that is not vectorized.
So, whereas the normal shipping
iTunes uses Ali's vector library
for the FFTs and the MDCTs,
this one does not.
It uses, in fact, a very fast scalar FFT,
but it is scalar.
So as not to add another
variable to the mix here,
we're not going to encode off a
CD as you would typically do at home.
Instead, we've got an AIFF file.
It turns out I actually
tried in preparing this demo,
I tried encoding off a CD,
and the problem is we're I.O.
bound instead of CPU bound,
so it didn't make a very good demo.
So here's our AIFF file that
we're going to convert to an MP3.
And here it goes.
So the number that I'd like you to
notice will appear here in a second.
It's the X factor here, 9.6X,
so that means we're roughly 10 times
real-time encoding from AIFF to MP3.
So this is using a scalar FFT and
a scalar MDCT at this time,
okay?
www.aliksa.com/velocity-engineering/
As impressive as 10X is,
you can do just one heck of a lot
better if you use the vector engine.
And I'll show you that in a second.
Or 29 seconds.
We could probably hear the
tune that it's trying to do.
Yeah, I didn't handicap it by asking
it to play while it was in touch.
Oh, okay, I see.
All right.
So he's putting all
his energies into that.
He handicapped the other one.
Okay.
That's always fair.
At roughly about 9x.
So, 9 times real-time.
Okay?
All right.
That's that.
And this is the vector version.
[Transcript missing]
So if any of you guys are
doing MP3 applications,
you should really look into the
stuff that's available in the vector
libraries down in the BDSP libraries.
There's good stuff there.
All right.
Okay, thank you, Bill.
So this is...
This is a very good
reason to use our VDSP.
It's extremely fast,
and it does the job right,
and I think you will see the
benefits of it right away.
The important thing also to remember is
that VDSP has also a scalar component
into it on the single precision engine,
and you don't have to worry about
which machine you're running on.
Just call it.
It will make the right decision for you.
It will run the correct
thing on the scalar machines.
It will write the correct
thing on the vector one.
The next topic I'd like to talk about
is the basic linear algebra subroutines.
We've been asked about this many times.
I'm happy to announce here that
we have a full suite of the basic
linear algebra subroutines in JAGUAR.
This is an important addition to JAGUAR,
and VDSP, VMathLib,
and BLAS is a cornerstone of
a lot of the engineering and
scientific work that is required.
I think people using JAGUAR are
going to be happy about that.
The BLAS that we have is
an industry-standard BLAS.
It comes in single and double precision,
real and complex, vector and scalar.
It transparently selects
between scalar and vector,
so you don't have to worry about
which machine you're running on.
We maintain multi-gigaflop performance,
even coming from DRAM,
which I'll show you in a little bit.
We have the fact that we are
going through a lot of machinery
to make sure that we're running
on a scalar or a vector machine.
We also have included some
specific calls to very small,
tiny matrix multiplies,
or complex matrix multiplies,
or vector matrix multiplies that
you can use if you're not worried
about the BLAS compatibility
from one platform to another.
There's a bunch of those
calls in there as well,
and they're extremely fast.
You have to know you're running on a
vector machine or a scalar machine.
You have to know what you're doing,
but you get the raw speed.
What I would like to show you
now is the performance of S-GEM.
S-GEM, for those of you who know,
is the complex multiplication of a matrix
times another one plus another matrix,
and there are two scalars
involved in here that have to
be multiplying in the middle.
And what we have here
is the comparison of the
Mac OS X BLAST S-GEM versus the MKL,
the Mathematical Kernel
Library from Intel.
As you can see,
we do quite well in the crucial
and very important portion,
up to 64 by 64.
It turns out that most of the
applications that we deal with
are on the tiny side of things,
and we like to give them
as much boost as possible.
And we maintain performance after that.
The Intel crowd does better
because of the way they handle
I.O., but that's beyond our reach.
There is nothing we can do
about this at this time.
But up to 64 by 64,
we can give you an enormous
amount of performance.
And it's pretty important to see,
it's a 1 GHz machine.
This is per processor again,
so if you multi-thread your application
and you run it on two processors,
you're going to get two of these guys.
You get 5 GFLOPS.
Per matrix multiply per processor.
So S-GAM again is one of those things,
it's like a 1024 complex FFT.
Everybody has it in their mind,
at least I do.
And I want to make sure what my
gigaflop rate is on that one.
We also have had traditionally
another library called VectorOps in
our OS for those of you who
have used previous versions of
OS X and some of the OS 9 before.
The differences between the
BLAS and the VectorOps is that
the BLAS is an industry standard.
If you have calls to BLAS,
it will just compile on our machine now.
The BLAS that we have is
based on a patented algorithm,
and it's very high performance.
VectorOps now is relegated
more to an educational tool.
The source is available.
You can download it from our website.
You can look at it and see
how we have vectorized it.
It has still pretty good performance,
but it's not as good as the BLAS.
VectorOps is good for small arrays.
If you really need source and you don't
want to worry about the BLAS and you
have small matrices or small vectors,
this is for you.
It also is only on the vector domain,
and it uses the vector registers as
opposed to regular pointers to arrays.
So if you're sitting on the
vector registers and you want
to use vector multiplies,
matrix multiplies,
and this is what you want to do.
What I would recommend is that the
BLAS is the preferred way of doing
work now as opposed to the VectorOps.
At this point, what I want to go into is
the performance issues,
and I have a few of these performance
issues that I will talk about,
and how you can do better
with your applications.
The first one is the
data injection technique,
and this is a word I came up with
as I was writing this slide here
because starving the processor
didn't just sound too good.
So this is a software-only approach.
It minimizes the pipeline stalls.
It really takes the execution
pipeline into account.
I will have a detailed example of that.
Remember, as deeper your pipeline is,
as we are going further and
further into processor land here,
and more and more progress
in gigahertz is happening,
well, these processors are getting
longer and longer pipelines,
and you have to worry about that.
So the deeper pipelines need
more independent set of data,
and this is exactly what I mean
by data injection techniques.
I also want to tell you that the dynamic
dependency will slow a machine down.
If you have, let's say, an expression,
and a result of that is required
for the next expression,
and the result of that is
required for the next expression,
that's what I call dynamic dependency,
it's hard to avoid stalls there.
Because the machine just has to wait
until the first one is done before
we can dive into the other one.
So this is something that
we would like to avoid.
The next performance issue that
comes to mind is vector algorithms.
It is very important for people who
are coming from the scalar domain to
remember that some very fast scalar
algorithms are just not vectorizable.
They don't have a parallel
grain in their lines.
I mean, there's just nothing
you can do about that.
You have to rethink your algorithms.
Different algorithms may be required.
Perhaps the different algorithm that you
chucked because it wasn't good enough
for scalar is not good enough for vector.
So this is important.
Again, the dynamic dependency of the
instruction causes slowdowns.
Keep that in mind.
And the data injection techniques
will not work in the presence
of dynamic dependencies.
I will follow this up with an example.
The next issue is the LSU bottleneck,
the load store unit on the PowerPC.
We typically see two or three loads and
stores for FPU and vector instructions.
Per vector and FPU and
vector instructions,
this is the way the
compiler generates things.
Some of the remedy for that would be
to inline or remove trivial functions.
We're in the habit of compartmentalizing
things and putting things away.
And for further use,
we've got one or two lines of code,
we wrap it up in a
function and put it away,
and then we call it.
What I'm advocating
here is not to do that.
Try to inline as much as possible.
Try to alleviate the problem of
going from one function to another.
Minimize memory movement.
And this is part of that.
By inlining,
you would minimize memory movement.
Keep values and registers
as much as possible.
This is somewhat in your
discretion and somewhat it's not.
Using the compiler,
it's somewhat not in your discretion.
And then if you wrote it in assembly,
of course, you can do whatever you want.
The LSU over-reliance frequently
causes two to three times slowdowns
in the codes that we have seen.
And this is one major problem that
we generally have to deal with.
It's to remove some of
these LSU instructions from
the instruction stream.
The next performance issue
is that you really have to
be aware of the ISA detail,
the instruction set
architecture of the PowerPC.
Be aware of that.
Know what the processor
is doing under your feet.
Remember, the vector engine is pipeline,
single instruction, and for all of 162
instructions that we have.
This is not true for the FPU.
The FPU produces stalls.
As an example, I have the FP divide.
The FP divide is not
pipelined but sequenced.
The FP divide on the early G4s
would take about 33 cycles,
would not allow anything
else to be dispatched,
and it will give you
the result after that.
And the new one,
the new G4s in the 1 GHz machines,
takes 37 cycles.
So be aware of that.
Also remember that the reciprocal
estimate is not pipelined.
The reciprocal estimate takes
anywhere from 14 to 21 cycles,
depending on which flavor
of PowerPC you use.
One other detail of the ISA.
that you should keep in mind is that we
only have dual issue on the older G4s.
These are, of course, superscalar,
out-of-order cores,
but the more issues you have,
the more work you can do.
But the old ones only have two,
and the new ones have triple issues,
so we can issue more of these
instructions and do more work.
Just have to remember that even
though we have a triple issue,
the vector engine can take
only two at the same time.
On the older designs,
there was a restriction of which
subunit would be able to process that,
but on the newer designs,
all of the VALU and the VPERM unit
inside the vector engine is up
for grabs for the dual issue.
Now I'd like to go over an example
of what happens if we use the data
injection technique that I alluded to.
Here is just one run-of-the-mill
example of a floating point program.
And this floating point
program is doing something,
let's say.
I don't know what it's doing,
but it's doing something.
And what we like to do is to find
out what happens to the processor.
I mentioned CHUD.
This is an output from a
CHUD tool that you will see later.
It's showing us what
the machine is doing,
the various sections of the
processor pipeline for the older
style G4s at this time here.
There's an instruction
stream on the left side,
and on the right side is
where the pipeline looks like.
The letters in D are
the stalls that you see,
and of course the compiler for me has
generated an add immediate and a load
floating point single that may or may
not be useful or needed at this time.
It takes 25 cycles to do this
particular little program here.
What we want to do is
find out what we can do.
can do to enhance this.
What I've done here is that I've
taken exactly that algorithm,
and now instead of using one set of data,
I'm using three sets of data.
Because what I saw was that
my pipeline had bubbles in it.
I had a dynamic dependency,
and that dynamic dependency
would not allow me to go as
fast as I would like to do.
Here what I've done is,
taken the same thing,
and now I'm doing three
things at the same time,
basically parallelizing my algorithm.
And looking one more
time at the CHUD tool,
again the instruction
stream is at the left side,
the pipeline is at the right side.
This is as perfectly as you can
get on this machine pipeline.
There is no stalls.
There are a little nitty-gritty
thing happening here,
but we're not going to talk about that.
But what happens is
that this is the best.
If all of your code would be like this,
your machine would be
flying at 10 gigahertz.
And you won't need to worry
about the frequency anymore.
This is as good as it gets.
And basically now we're doing
three sets of this for the
same program in 32 cycles.
So basically,
instead of the 25 that we have,
now we've brought it down to 10 cycles.
Extremely powerful technique,
this data injection,
which basically parallelizes
the set of data that you're
sending inside the program.
And we use this all the time.
And one of the basic problems of getting
slower performance on the PowerPC.
I'd like to wrap up this
section of the talk by telling
you where to go to learn more.
I'm not expecting you to write all
this stuff down and go and apply it
right away after this session here.
So where can you browse it?
We have a new Spiffy website
which has a lot of information
for you and you can find it in
developer.apple.com hardware VE.
You can code it by going
to the Veclip framework.
This is where all of our frameworks are.
If you wanted to talk to the VDSP,
to the BLAS, to the VectorOps or the
VBasicOps or the VMathlib,
this is where you would find it.
How you would actually
use it in your program,
you would include Veclip as
a hierarchical include here,
Veclip slash Veclip dot h.
And using it is as easy as putting
the minus framework in front of the,
as a compile option and our library which
is Veclip and then you're set to go.
And you'll get the benefits of the
vectorization whether you like it or not.
Well,
you have to call the vector library.
All right.
So I'd like to turn the
podium to my friends from the
hardware performance group,
and they're going to tell us a little
bit more about what they've done to
show us where the bottlenecks are.
I'd like to introduce Sanjay
Patel and Nathan Slingerland.
Hi, my name is Sanjay Patel.
I'm in the Architecture and
Performance group.
This is Nathan Slingerland.
So we live over in hardware,
so we like to optimize down to the metal.
And that's why we've
created the CHUD tools,
Computer Hardware
Understanding Development Tools.
So I'd like to introduce the first
couple of tools are used to actually
Get down to PowerPC machine-level
instruction profiling.
So the first tool is AMBER.
It's a command line tracer.
And what that allows you to do
is get the machine code for your
program to actually see it in a
pipeline view through a cycle-accurate
simulator that's called SIMG4,
which models the PPC7400.
So as Ali was showing earlier,
we have our example of division where we
use a reciprocal estimate in this case.
And so all you have to do to
instrument your code is throw in
these little start/stop functions,
which we'll take a look at in a second.
There are actually many different
ways we can start and stop tracing.
So at this point, I guess we'll go to...
Well, we'll take a trace in a second.
But as we saw earlier,
this is the output from SimG4,
which is the cycle-accurate simulator.
And what we see here is
that the first instruction,
the reciprocal estimate,
is a long latency instruction,
and it's not pipelined.
So what you see there in the E's,
the processor is actually
executing over that,
but none of the following
instructions can proceed ahead of it.
And of course you see the
other data dependency stalls
with the highlighted red D's.
So what we want to do is,
we'll take a trace that
shows this in a second,
and show how we can break
some of these pipeline stalls.
So if we can switch over
to the demo computer.
There we go.
So let's first take a look at the
start/stop function that we introduced.
In this case,
it's just a single machine instruction,
which is actually an illegal
instruction from user-level code.
And what we've done is we've overridden
the illegal instruction handler in
amber to use this as a trigger to say,
"Start or stop tracing my program."
So it's as simple as that.
There are a number of different
ways you could do this as well.
You could either hot-key if your program
is long-running to take a massive trace.
Then you're just depending on how fast
you can hit the keys to start and stop.
You can actually start and
stop based on a symbol or an
instruction address as well.
So these are the parameters
for amber you see on screen.
So since we have an
instrumented function,
we're going to use the dash
I option and take a trace.
So you can see it's
really a quick process to,
since our program is so short,
we're just going to take a
trace of 16 instructions.
And if we look here,
we'll see what Amber has created a
directory called trace with some offset.
And if you go in there,
you'll see there's a thread file.
So if your program is multi-threaded,
we'll create multiple
files for each thread.
And so now what we want to do is,
this file is actually binary,
so to make sense of it you
need to input it to SIMG4,
and you can get a pipeline
view as we saw earlier.
Okay, so there's our pipeline
view as we saw in the slide.
So I guess let's go back to
the presentation computer so we
can take a look at that output.
Can we go back to the
presentation computer?
Okay, so here we are again.
So this is the same output
we just saw from SIMG4.
And as we said,
it takes a long time to execute
because of that reciprocal estimate.
So as Ali showed us,
we can break that bottleneck
by using a reciprocal square
root and then multiplying it,
because reciprocal square
root is a pipeline instruction
and it's low latency.
So again, we'd have our start and stop
calls to Amber to take a trace,
and if we took that trace
and input it to SIMG4,
we'd see that the pipeline output,
now we've eliminated the
long delay at the beginning,
we still have all of our
data dependency stalls.
But we've already gotten this
program down to 24 cycles,
so we're 29% faster than the base case.
So again,
if we were to use the data injection
technique where we do multiple sets
of data rather than a single to
match the length of the pipeline of
the processor we're interested in,
we'll see that we have the SIMG4 output
shows that there are no more stalls.
And what we've actually done now is
throughput is 2.9 times as fast as
what we started in our base case.
This program is only one cycle
longer than what it would take
to do the single division.
Okay, so in summary,
once you're ready to get down
to optimizing at machine level,
you want to take traces and use SIMG4
to analyze your output so you can
identify all the bottlenecks that you
might be encountering on the processor.
So in this case,
we saw we got a 29% improvement
just by switching one instruction,
one machine instruction.
And then by using data injection,
we can actually be almost three
times as fast as our base case.
So I'll now turn it over to Nathan to
talk about a couple of our other tools.
Thank you, Sanjay.
Okay, so I'm going to talk
about a few other tools,
and they rely on the
performance counters,
which are built into the hardware on
the PowerPC chip and also in the memory
controller on some of our machines.
And with these performance counters,
you can count interesting
performance events like cache
misses or instruction counts,
execution stalls and the like.
And the Chud toolkit gives you the
ability to actually ask those counters
what's going on inside your program.
So the first tool we're going to talk
about and I'll demo for you is Shikari.
And Shikari is a
system-wide profiling tool.
Okay, so it's going to show you over time
what's happening in the whole system.
So you can use,
you can sample based on time,
like I said, so it would be similar to
a program like Sampler.
Or you can sample on events,
so any of those performance events.
So you can find out where
cache misses are coming from.
And then what it does is it
will correlate those events
with your source code.
And it'll show you performance
hotspots based on those events.
and you can also look at an
annotated disassembly of any
function that is a hotspot.
Now let's go to the demo machine.
So in order to demonstrate
how you can use Shikari to
track down real performance
bottlenecks and then fix them,
we have this converted screensaver.
It's called Flurry by Calum Robinson.
And right now this is the
original Flurry code running.
And what we're doing is we're timing
how long it takes to render 500 frames.
It's an OpenGL screensaver.
And in this machine,
it's almost 12 seconds,
11.6 seconds to do that.
Okay, so the first step in understanding
any kind of performance issues
would be to profile this,
especially because this is a screensaver.
We don't know if we're CPU-bound
or graphics card-bound or what.
So this is the main Shikari window.
What we have here first is the profile
that's going to list from top to bottom
the most frequently sampled functions.
And below that we have a list
of sampling configurations.
This pop-up here is basically
the defaults that come with it,
but you're free to add configurations.
You can take advantage of all
the performance counters that
are available in your system.
So,
let's actually use the time profile and
see where Flurry is spending its time.
So it's taken a second's
worth of samples.
And we can see the first thing that
pops out to us here is that the
lib system square root is taking
a significant portion of time.
Now, as Ali told you,
the Mac OS X square root is actually
quite fast and very precise.
But because this is a screensaver,
maybe we don't want to be getting
back the IEEE 754 compliant,
53 bits of precision, all that goodness,
for the screensaver.
So if we go and look at
where we're calling this,
we can see that this is actually a pretty
good candidate for replacement by what
we have as the floating point reciprocal
square root estimate instruction.
And now, this isn't appropriate
for every algorithm,
of course.
A lot of times you will need
to use the lib system math
library square root function.
But in our case,
we know that we're okay with that
and that the 5 bits of precision
that this provides is sufficient.
So let's see how much that helps us.
So almost a 2x speedup.
That's pretty good for, you know,
it's still scalar.
So the question now is, again,
like as Ali said, profile, profile,
profile.
Let's profile again and see where
we're spending our time now that we've
eliminated the call-to-lib system.
So we can see that now the system square
root function is gone from the profile.
That's what we expect.
And now we're spending a lot of
time in update smoke and draw smoke.
That's our code.
That's inside of Flurry.
Okay, so we know that,
because this is our code,
we know that this is dominated
by floating point computation,
this particular, these two functions.
And so what we're going
to do next is look at,
and what Shaqari can tell you,
is floating point issue stalls.
These are the dependency stalls
that we talked about earlier.
And there's a preset for that.
So this will tell you where in
your code the most floating-point
dependency stalls are coming from.
Okay, so we can see now that most of
our floating point issue stalls
are coming from update smoke.
So with Shaqari,
you can drill down and see the
actual disassembled code behind that.
And it's going to visually point
out to you where the hot spot is.
So blue meaning not hot or cold,
it wasn't referenced or
wasn't recorded in the sample.
And then we'll see yellow or
orange when we get to a hot spot.
So here it is, around,
in the file smoke.c,
around line 279 or so.
If we go back to our source code here.
So that's this loop.
So, okay,
we already know what to do about this,
right?
We have dependency stalls.
We could use data injection,
unroll the loop, have it try to do more
things in parallel.
Or, if we're going to spend the time,
maybe we should vectorize
it and unroll it.
So do both at the same time.
And that's what this code is here.
So, let's see how that performs.
So almost another 2x
speedup for using AltaVec.
Okay, so where would we go next, right?
Well, let's actually, you know,
we might think, well, let's try and find
AlteVec issue stalls or,
you know,
maybe we should MP it or something,
you know, multi-thread this app
or something like that.
So let's use,
let's profile again and let's see where
Sha'Carri says we're spending time.
So what's interesting here
is now that we're not,
most of the time we're actually
not in our code at all.
We're actually in the
driver for the GeForce3,
this is the GeForce3
card on this machine.
And actually, what we found is on other
machines with lesser graphics
cards you hit this much quicker.
So you actually, you know,
you may think that you need to, you know,
in order to optimize this application you
need to keep beating on the CPU aspect,
the, you know, that we're CPU bound.
But in actuality,
our OpenGL colleagues have told
us there are probably better
ways to be rendering this and,
you know, that would be the next step.
Okay, let's go back to the slides again,
the presentation.
So in addition to the tools
Shikari and Amber and SimG4,
that's the instruction simulator,
the cycle-accurate simulator that
we've been showing you the output from,
these are the other tools,
some of the other tools that
you get in the CHUD toolkit.
Monster,
which is probably the most direct
way you'd think about accessing
the performance counters.
It's going to give you a tabular view,
like an Excel spreadsheet more or less,
of the performance counter data,
and it can also give you a
chart of that data over time.
ACID is another way to filter
traces for performance statistics.
And then Reggie is a way to look at
special purpose registers that are
normally-- they're supervisor-only,
so you can't normally manipulate
those from user space.
And finally, all of our tools,
Monster and Shikari,
and others are built on
top of the chud framework.
And what you can do with this
framework is you can make
your own performance tools,
or you can actually instrument your
code to start and stop our tools,
or actually instrument your code
and use the counters directly.
So all these tools are currently
available on the web at this address.
They will at some point also be
available on the developer CDs.
And any issues you can report to
cheddtoolsfeedback@group.apple.com.
And at this time,
I'm going to turn the presentation over
to Mark Tozer for a few more slides.
Thank you.
So I just want to clarify my earlier
comments at the opening that if you
also understand or remember how to do
the square root function or symbol,
you also qualify to be in this session,
not just being able to
actually perform one.
So roadmap, let's see,
other places where you can go since
this is the beginning of the week.
Some more performance tool
sessions that you should visit and
learn more about the CHUD tools.
Also more sessions on how to
optimize your application for
multi-threaded applications,
specifically for MP systems themselves.
One thing to know, Apple is shipping,
except for one product line, the iBook,
every system is shipping
with a G4 processor with the
introduction of the iMac.
So the G4 and the Velocity Engine is
available for you on all of our systems
that are available to our customers,
both in the consumer, the portable,
and the PowerMac line.
So who to contact for
further information?
Here's my email,
and feel free to contact me.
Documentation, again, developer.apple.com
slash hardware slash VE.
Some more information with regards
to our scientific computing group.
Also have some more information on
the BLAST information that worked,
actually, that we've done with Genentech.
That's also available off
that same page as a link.